POCSO stands for, The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act, 2012] is legislation which aims at protecting children from all types of sexual abuse. 

Although the Convention on the Rights of the Child was adopted by the United Nations in 1989, the POCSO act was not adressed by way of any legislation in India till the year 2012.  It provides stringent deterrents for the commission of offences against children ranging from a minimum of 20 years of imprisonment to the death penalty in case of aggravated penetrative sexual assault.Before the introduction of the POCSO Act, 2012, the sole legislation in India that aimed at protecting the rights of a child was the Goa’s Children’s Act, 2003 and Rules, 2004.  Under the Indian Penal Code, 1860, child sexual abuse accounted for an offence under Sections 375, 354 and 377. These provisions neither protect male children from sexual abuse nor protect their modesty. Also, definitions of the terms like ‘modesty’ and ‘unnatural offence’ are not provided in the Code. 

The punishment for the commission of offences against children ranging from a minimum of 20 years of imprisonment to the death penalty in case of aggravated penetrative sexual assault.
Need of the POCSO Act, 2012

POCSO stands for, The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act, 2012] is legislation which aims at protecting children from all types of sexual abuse. 

Owing to the lack of any specific legislation, it was pivotal to establish a statute that pointedly tackles the issue of growing child sexual abuse cases in the country. With the efforts of multifarious NGOs, activists and the Ministry of Women and Child Development, POCSO Act, 2012 was enforced on 14th November 2012. 

POCSO stands for, The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act, 2012] is legislation which aims at protecting children from all types of sexual abuse. 


Scope of the POCSO Act, 2012
In India, POCSO Act, 2012 is not the only legislation which deals with child sexual abuse cases. The POCSO Act cannot be called a complete code in itself and provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Indian Penal Code, 1860, Juvenile Justice Act, and Information Technology Act, 2000 overlap and encapsulate the procedure and specify the offences. 

POCSO stands for, The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act, 2012] is legislation which aims at protecting children from all types of sexual abuse. 

Application of the POCSO Act, 2012.which stands for, The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act, 2012] is legislation which aims at protecting children from all types of sexual abuse. 
POCSO Act, 2012 is divided into 46 sections. It was published in the official gazette on 20th June 2012 but came into force on 14th November 2012 which raises the question of its applicability to the cases prior to its enforcement date. 

In the case of M. Loganathan v. State (2016), the offence of rape was committed on 28.09.2012 i.e., before the Act was enforced, but the trial court convicted the accused under Section 4 of the POCSO Act. Consequently, the High Court of Madras declared that conviction being violative of Article 20(1) of the Constitution of India, 1950 was unconstitutional and it was modified to punishment under Section 376(1) of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. 

In another case of Kanha v. State of Maharashtra (2017), the accused was convicted under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 6 of the POCSO Act for having committed aggravated penetrative sexual assault upon the victim which resulted in her pregnancy. The accused contended that unless there is proof of age of foetus, the date of the commission of offence was not in proximity with 14.11.2012 and thus, he cannot be prosecuted under Section 6 of the POCSO Act. The High Court of Bombay accepted the argument and acquitted the accused of all the charges. Therefore, it is apparent that when the applicability of the POCSO Act is questioned, the courts either alter the conviction of the accused or acquit them. 

The Act enunciates the punishment where the offences have been committed against a child. Section 2(1)(d) of the POCSO Act contains the definition of child. It states that, “ a child means any person below the age of eighteen year”. This implies that offences perpetrated against anyone of the age less than eighteen years are punishable under the POCSO Act. 

Importance of the POCSO Act, 2012 POCSO Act, 2012 was enacted when the cases of sexual abuse against children were rising. It contains provisions regarding the protection of children from sexual assault and pornography and lays down the procedure for the implementation of these laws.Incidents of sexual abuse against children occur at schools, religious places, parks, hostels, etc and the security of children is not guaranteed anywhere. With such emerging dangers, it was significant to introduce separate legislation which could provide a reliable system for mitigating the number of such offences and punishing the perpetrators. 
The Act has been instrumental in providing a robust justice mechanism for the victims of sexual abuse and has highlighted the significance of child rights and safety. The reporting of cases of child sexual abuse has also surged as a consequence of awareness. The Act covers punishment for both non-penetrative sexual assault and aggravated penetrative sexual assault. 
insolvency
Features of the POCSO Act, 2012
Some of the salient features of the POCSO Act are discussed as follows:

Confidentiality of the victim’s identity: Section 23 of the POCSO Act provides for the procedure of media and imposes the duty to maintain the child victim’s identity unless the Special Court has allowed the disclosure. Section 23(2) states, “no reports in any media shall disclose the identity of a child including his name, address, photograph, family details, school, neighbourhood and any other particulars which may lead to the disclosure of the identity of the child”. In the landmark case of Bijoy @ Guddu Das v. The State of West Bengal (2017), the Calcutta High Court reiterated the law made under Section 23 and declared that any person including a police officer shall be prosecuted if he/ she commits such a breach. 
Gender-neutral provisions: Another glaring feature of the POCSO Act is that it does not create any distinction between the victim or the perpetrators on the basis of their gender. This overcomes one of the biggest shortcomings of the Indian Penal Code’s provisions. The definition of child includes anyone below 18 years of age and in several cases, the courts have even convicted women for engaging in child sexual abuse incidents. 
Mandatory reporting of child abuse cases: Sexual abuse cases happen behind closed doors and the elders attempt to hide these incidents due to the stigma that is attached to these crimes. Consequently, for the proper implementation of the POCSO Act, reporting of these incidents by the third parties who have the knowledge or apprehension of such offences, has been made mandatory under Sections 19 to 22 of the POCSO Act. These laws have been made on the basis of assumptions that children are vulnerable and helpless and society has the duty to protect the interests of the children. 
In the case of State of Gujarat v. Anirudhsing and Another (1997), the Supreme Court had observed that it is the duty of every citizen to aid and cooperate with the investigative agencies and give information regarding the commission of cognizable offences. In various instances, schools and teachers help the child victims by reporting the sexual abuse cases to the authorities. For example, in the case of Nar Bahadur v. State of Sikkim (2016), teachers received information that her student is pregnant due to repeated sexual assualts on her by an elderly accused. The teachers informed the panchayat who lodged an FIR in the police station. 

Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra (2013) is an important case where the Supreme Court laid down guidelines regarding reporting the offence. In this case, rape was committed on an 11-year-old child with moderate intellectual disability but it was neither reported to the police nor to the juvenile justice board. The Court observed that children with intellectual disabilities are more vulnerable and therefore, the institutions which house them have the responsibility to report sexual abuse incidents against them. Furthermore, it was laid down that non-reporting of crime in accordance with the provisions of the POCSO Act is a serious offence.

The last seen theory: The theory of last seen is applied in the child sexual abuse trials. According to this theory, the person who is last seen with the victim is assumed to be the perpetrator of the offence when the time gap between the point when they were last seen alive is so minute that it is not possible that any other person could have committed the crime. In the case of Shyamal Ghosh v. State of West Bengal (2012), it was observed that when the time gap is large then it is not reasonable for the Courts to apply the last seen theory. 
Child-friendly investigation and trial: Sections 24, 26 and 33 of the POCSO Act lay down the procedure of investigation and trial which has been formulated keeping in mind the needs of a child. The following points are taken into consideration while investigating any crime under POCSO Act:
i. The statement of the child is to be recorded at his/ her place of residence and generally by a woman police officer.

ii. The officer who is to record the statement of the child should not be wearing a uniform.

iii. The officer should ensure that the child does not come in contact with the accused during the examination.











